What is a repository?
-----------------------------
A repository is a storage location where your project's files and their complete history of changes are kept, which enables version control and collaboration for software development or any file-based project.

local vs remote  repository based on that developers localy develop the code and push the same into remote

What is version control system (VCS)?
----------------------------
Version control is a software engineering practice that tracks and manages changes to computer files, primarily source code, over time. It allows developers to record every modification made, compare different versions, and revert to earlier versions when needed, providing a complete history of changes for files in a project.

There are 3 main types of VCS

1. Local VCS - Changes are tracked only on a local machine, with no built-in collaboration features.
2. Centralized VCS(SVN) - A single central repository holds the code, and developers synchronize their changes with it.
3. Distributed VCS (like Git) - Every user has a full copy of the entire codebase and history, enabling offline work and robust collaboration.

How we can manage the repository during application development and deployment ?


Managing a repository during application development and deployment involves several best practices and workflows to ensure smooth collaboration, code quality, and reliable releases.

1. Maintain a branching strategy - Use branches to isolate development /testing and production envrionements/ work/ codebases.This avoids direct changes in the main codebase and allows parallel development.


2. Commits and Commit Messages -Make frequent, small commits with clear, descriptive messages to document changes well. This helps in tracking what was done and why.

3. Pull Requests (PRs) / Merge Requests- Depending upon the branching strategy 
Use PRs to propose changes from feature branches into main branches. This enables code review, discussions, and automated testing before merging, maintaining code quality and collaboration transparency.

3. Code Reviews -Incorporate mandatory peer reviews on PRs to catch bugs, enforce coding standards, and share knowledge.


4. Continuous Integration (CI)- Integrate automated builds and tests on every commit or PR to detect problems early.


Managing Repository During Deployment

Release Branches / Tags- Create dedicated release branches or tags to mark stable versions ready for deployment. Tags are usually named with version numbers (e.g., v1.0.0).

Continuous Deployment / Delivery (CD) - Automate deployment pipelines triggered by merges or tags to deploy the latest stable code to staging or production environments.

Rollback Capability - Keep previous stable versions tagged or branched so you can quickly roll back if something goes wrong in production.

Documentation and Versioning - Maintain proper documentation for each release, including changes, deployment steps, and version numbers.


Overall, effective repository management during application development and deployment relies on a robust branching strategy, clear commit practices, code reviews, automated testing with CI/CD pipelines, and careful versioning for releases. Git, combined with collaboration platforms like GitHub or GitLab, facilitates these practices efficiently.


GIT TOOLS
--------------
Git Bash and Git tools are essential components for working with Git repositories, and various tools are used for deployment in software development.

Git Bash is a command-line interface (CLI) for Windows that provides a Unix-like shell experience to use Git commands. It allows developers to run Git commands and interact with the Git version control system in a way similar to Linux or macOS terminals. Git Bash includes a Bash emulation environment, enabling users to execute shell commands, scripts, and Git operations seamlessly on Windows.

Git Tools - Git tools refer to the various software interfaces and utilities that facilitate working with Git repositories. 

Command-line Git: The core Git software used via CLI for managing repositories, commits, branches, merges, etc.

Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs): Tools like GitKraken, Sourcetree, and GitHub Desktop that provide visual ways to manage Git operations.

Integrated Development Environment (IDE) Integrations: Most IDEs like Visual Studio Code, IntelliJ IDEA, and others have built-in or plugin-based Git support.

Remote Repository Platforms: Services like GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket host remote Git repositories, provide collaboration features like issue tracking, code reviews, pull requests, and CI/CD

what is Git Repository?

A Git repository (repo) is the storage space where your project files and Git history live


Git commands to utilize the git repository

git init: Creates a new local repository.
git clone: Copies a remote repo in github to your local machine.
git add, commit, push, pull, fetch, merge: Core commands to manage and synchronize code changes.
git branch, checkout: Manage different lines of development.
git status, log: Inspect repo state and history

to understand further on git commands please use this link https://education.github.com/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf


What is deployment ?
-----------------
Deployment is the process of making a software application available for use in a specific environment, such as production or staging. It involves a series of steps including installing, configuring, testing, and releasing the software so that end-users or systems can access and use it effectively.


Key Aspects of Deployment

1. Planning and assessment - Defining deployment goals for release 1.0, assessing risks, and creating a detailed plan for smooth execution.

2. Development and Configuration - Preparing the software package, including compiling code and configuring environments.

3. Testing and Quality Assurance - Running automated and manual tests to ensure the software works correctly and is free of defects.

4. Staging or Lower Enviroments - Deploying to a staging environment that mimics production to validate functionality and catch environment-specific issues.

5. Production Deployment - Releasing the software to the live environment where users can access it, with attention to timing, access control, and communication.

6. Monitoring and Maintenance - Continuously monitoring the deployed software for performance and issues, applying updates and patches as needed


Deployment can be handled through various strategies such as continuous deployment (automatic release of every change), continuous delivery (keeping software always ready for deployment), staged deployments, and blue-green deployments to minimize downtime.

Tools used for deployment
--------------------------
CI/CD Platforms: Jenkins, GitLab CI, GitHub Actions, CircleCI automate building, testing, and deploying code.

Configuration Management: Ansible, Chef, Puppet automate infrastructure provisioning and application deployment.

Containerization and Orchestration: Docker packages applications, Kubernetes manages containerized app deployments.

Cloud Platforms: Azure DevOps, AWS CodePipeline, Google Cloud Build support deployment pipelines.

Artifacts and Package Managers: Nexus, JFrog Artifactory, npm, Maven manage build artifacts and dependencies.

Together, these Git and deployment tools enable efficient code management, testing, collaboration, and automated delivery of software products across development and production stages.


What is Vercel?
-------------------------------
Vercel is a cloud platform designed to simplify the deployment, hosting, and scaling of modern web applications, especially those built with frameworks like Next.js.

 It provides a seamless, serverless experience where developers can deploy Next.js apps with minimal configuration, leveraging automatic optimizations and global content delivery networks (CDNs).

How Vercel Helps in Next.js App Deployment?

1.Instant Deployments - Dev  pushes the code in github --> vercel does the CICD the Next.js app, providing a live URL instantly.

2. Optimized for Next.js - Vercel is created by the makers of Next.js, ensuring tight integration. It supports Next.js features like Incremental Static Regeneration (ISR), Server-Side Rendering (SSR), API routes, and image optimization out-of-the-box.

3. Serverless Functions - Vercel deploys API routes and backend logic as serverless functions, scaling automatically without manual server management.

4. Global CDN - Static assets and pre-rendered pages are distributed globally via Vercel's CDN, reducing latency and improving performance worldwide.

5. Preview Deployments -  Every pull request or branch generates a preview deployment, enabling team collaboration and testing before production release.

6. Automatic Scaling and Zero Configuration - No need to worry about infrastructure scaling or complex server setups; Vercel handles it automatically.


Vercel fully supports these new version 15 capabilities, including flexible server components and enhanced hydration techniques. 

The integration with the new App Router allows developers to build more modular and scalable applications, with Vercel handling the deployment nuances seamlessly.

Features like on-demand revalidation, incremental adoption of React 18 capabilities in Next.js 15, and edge functions run smoothly on Vercel, enabling superior user experiences.

Vercel’s deployment pipeline aligns with Next.js 15’s src/ directory structure and native support for TypeScript or JavaScript, facilitating streamlined continuous deployment.

summary 
------------
Vercel is an ideal platform for deploying Next.js apps as it offers automated, optimized, and global hosting with deep integration into Next.js's latest innovations, including version 15. This results in faster deployments, better performance, and a straightforward developer experience from code to production.

Deploying Next js app into Vercel using github
--------------------------------------------------
1. Create a github account and create a repository

2. from local repo these commands helps to push the code 

git init
git add .
git commit -m "init"
git branch -M main
git remote add origin <your-github-repo-url>
git push -u origin main


note:please generate PAT personal access token from settings ---> developer settings --> Generate a new token (classic recommended) while generating the token please checkmark repo (full control of private repositories)
workflow (to push to workflows) Generate the token and copy it immediately and save it

once pushed again git push -u origin main with PAT token code will be pushed to remote repository